.\" Manpage for brightness(1)
.TH BRIGHTNESS 1 "April 2025" "1.0" "Brightness Control"
.SH NAME
brightness \- control internal and external display backlight brightness
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B brightness
[\fB-m\fR|\fB--machine-readable\fR] \
[\fB-r\fR|\fB--human-readable\fR] \
[\fB-a up|down\fR|\fB--adjust up|down\fR] \
[\fB-s VALUE\fR|\fB--set VALUE\fR] \
[\fB-R\fR|\fB--raw\fR] \
[\fB-n\fR|\fB--nodisplay\fR] \
[\fB-d IFACE\fR|\fB--device IFACE\fR] \
[\fB-P\fR|\fB--persist-device\fR] \
[\fB-x CONNECTOR\fR|\fB--external CONNECTOR\fR] \
[\fB--profile-new NAME\fR] \
[\fB--profile-load NAME\fR] \
[\fB-h\fR|\fB--help\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B brightness
is a command-line utility to query and set the brightness of internal backlight interfaces (e.g. laptop panels via \fI/sys/class/backlight\fR) and external monitors supporting DDC/CI via \fI/dev/i2c-*\/drm_dp_aux*\fR.  It can display raw and percentage values, step-adjust up or down, save a chosen interface, and stub in profiles.
.PP
By default, without options, it prints usage help.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-m\fR, \fB--machine-readable\fR
Print the raw brightness value (integer).
.TP
\fB-r\fR, \fB--human-readable\fR
Print both raw and percentage:  
Internal: “Internal backlight: raw=XXX, max=YYY, percent=ZZZ%”  
External: “External 'NAME': raw=XXX, max=YYY, percent=ZZZ%”
.TP
\fB-a up|down\fR, \fB--adjust up|down\fR
Step adjust brightness by 10% of maximum (internal or via DDC/CI).
.TP
\fB-s VALUE\fR, \fB--set VALUE\fR
Set brightness.  By default, VALUE is percent (0–100).  With \fB-R\fR, VALUE is the raw backlight value.
.TP
\fB-R\fR, \fB--raw\fR
Treat \fB-s VALUE\fR as a raw backlight number, not percentage.
.TP
\fB-n\fR, \fB--nodisplay\fR
Suppress the X11 on-screen popup when changing internal brightness.
.TP
\fB-d IFACE\fR, \fB--device IFACE\fR
Select a specific internal backlight interface under \fI/sys/class/backlight/IFACE\fR.
.TP
\fB-P\fR, \fB--persist-device\fR
Save the chosen internal interface to \~/.config/brightness/config so it’s used as default.
.TP
\fB-x CONNECTOR\fR, \fB--external CONNECTOR\fR
Target an external monitor by connector name (e.g. “HDMI-1” or “eDP-1”).  Uses DDC/CI over i2c-dev or drm_dp_aux nodes.
.TP
\fB--profile-new NAME\fR
Stub: create a new profile named NAME (interactive TUI not yet implemented).
.TP
\fB--profile-load NAME\fR
Stub: load and apply a saved profile.
.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Display this help message and exit successfully.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B brightness
exits with
.PP
.TP
0  
on success, or  
.TP
>0  
if an error occurred (e.g., invalid option, cannot access backlight or DDC device).
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI~/.config/brightness/config\fR
Stores the last persisted internal interface.
.TP
\fI/sys/class/backlight/*/brightness\fR
Internal backlight control.
.TP
\fI/sys/class/backlight/*/max_brightness\fR
Internal maximum value.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Query the raw internal brightness:
.IP
\% brightness -m
.TP
Show nice internal status:
.IP
\% brightness -r
.TP
Step external HDMI monitor down:
.IP
\% brightness -x HDMI-1 -a down
.TP
Set external monitor to 40%:
.IP
\% brightness -x HDMI-1 -s 40
.TP
Save your preferred internal backlight (e.g. “intel_backlight”):
.IP
\% brightness -d intel_backlight -P
.SH BUGS
Profiles are not yet implemented; DDC/CI support may vary by kernel and driver.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by kleinpanic.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.

